DOCS-32,DOCS-527: Refactor troubleshooting guide (#1242)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/appendix/troubleshooting.md

linkTitle: "Troubleshooting"
weight:
type: "docs"
description: "A guide to basic troubleshooting of a Viam-based robotic system, with easy fixes to common problems."
---

> This document lists common errors encountered when working with `viam-server` and the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com), and provides simple steps to resolve them. While many common issues and their possible resolutions are presented here, this list is not comprehensive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document lists common errors encountered when working with `viam-server` and the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com), and provides simple steps to resolve them.
While many common issues and their possible resolutions are presented here, this list is not comprehensive.
```
Newline

> If you have encountered an error that is not listed here, we'd love to hear from you on our [Community Discord](https://discord.gg/viam)! Please post the error message you recieved along with how you were able to trigger it and we'll see if we can help.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have encountered an error that is not listed here, we'd love to hear from you on our [Community Discord](https://discord.gg/viam)! Please post the error message you received along with how you were able to trigger it and we'll see if we can help.
```

> If you have encountered an error that is not listed here, we'd love to hear from you on our [Community Discord](https://discord.gg/viam)! Please post the error message you recieved along with how you were able to trigger it and we'll see if we can help.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have encountered an error that is not listed here, we'd love to hear from you on our [Community Discord](https://discord.gg/viam)! Please post the error message you received along with how you were able to trigger it and we'll see if we can help.
```

## Common Installation Errors

### Verifying write failed. Contents of SD card is different from what was written to it.

- **Description:** When following our Raspberry Pi [installation guide](/installation/prepare/rpi-setup/), the [Raspberry Pi imager](https://www.raspberrypi.com/software/) may fail to validate the written Raspberry Pi OS image when using some micro SD card readers or USB hubs.

> - **Solution:** Try a differnt USB port on your computer, or use a different micro SD card reader.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Solution:** Try a different USB port on your computer, or use a different micro SD card reader.
```

   If you are connecting the micro SD reader through a USB hub, try connecting the reader directly to your computer instead.

### The authenticity of host 'name-pi.local' can't be established.

- **Description:** When following our [installation guides](/installation/), the very first `ssh` connection you make to your newly-imaged [board](/components/board/) (such as a Raspberry Pi) will likely encounter this message.
   This is expected: `ssh` is advising you that it has not yet connected to this address, and prompts you for how to proceed.

- **Solution:** The message will ask `Are you sure you want to continue connecting?`.
   Type `yes` and then press the return key to continue with the connection.

>    You should recieve a successful confirmation message similar to: `Warning: Permanently added 'name-pi.local' to the list of known hosts.`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   You should receive a successful confirmation message similar to: `Warning: Permanently added 'name-pi.local' to the list of known hosts.`
```

- **Description:** Your computer is not able to connect to the [board](/components/board/) (such as a Raspberry Pi) via `ssh`.

- **Solution:** Ensure that both your computer and the board itself are connected to the internet, and verify each of the following:
   - If you are on a Windows computer, be sure that you do not have an outoging firewall preventing `ssh` connections over port `22`.
   - Your `ssh` connection string should resemble the following: `ssh username@name-pi.local`. Be sure that you match hostname, username, and password exactly to what you initially configured when imaging your board.
   - If you are still unable to connect, try power cycling the Pi and trying your connection again.
   - If that fails, try re-imaging your board following the [installation guide](/installation/) appropriate for your board.
   If using the Raspberry Pi [installation guide](/installation/prepare/rpi-setup/), be sure to carefully enter the configuration details under the **Advanced Options** (gear icon) button on the [Raspberry Pi imager](https://www.raspberrypi.com/software/) before you re-image your board.

### ssh: connect to host name-pi port 22: Connection timed out

> - **Description:** Your computer is not able to connect to the [board](/components/board/) (such as a Raspberry Pi) via `ssh` before reaching a timeout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Description:** Your computer is not able to connect to the [board](/components/board/) through `ssh` before reaching a timeout.
```
[opt] We are trying not to use via or mention RPI over other boards, don’t think example is necessary here but up to you tbh

linkTitle: "Troubleshooting"
weight:
type: "docs"
description: "A guide to basic troubleshooting of a Viam-based robotic system, with easy fixes to common problems."
---

This document lists common errors encountered when working with `viam-server` and the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com), and provides simple steps to resolve them.
While many common issues and their possible resolutions are presented here, this list is not comprehensive.

If you have encountered an error that is not listed here, we'd love to hear from you on our [Community Discord](https://discord.gg/viam)!
Please post the error message you received along with how you were able to trigger it and we'll see if we can help.

## Common Installation Errors

> ### Verifying write failed. Contents of SD card is different from what was written to it.

Author: Good call! Moved to `installation/prepare/rpi-setup.md`

   If using the Raspberry Pi [installation guide](/installation/prepare/rpi-setup/), be sure to carefully enter the configuration details under the **Advanced Options** (gear icon) button on the [Raspberry Pi imager](https://www.raspberrypi.com/software/) before you re-image your board.

### ssh: connect to host hostname port 22: Connection timed out

- **Description:** Your computer is not able to connect to the {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="board" text="board" >}} through `ssh` before reaching a timeout.

- **Solution:** Depending on your local network, it may take a minute or two for your `ssh` connection to successfully reach the board.
   - If you encounter this error once or twice, try your `ssh` command again and wait until it completes.
   - If the error persists, try the solutions presented for the `Host is down` error message above.

## Common Viam App Errors

### Failed to connect; retrying

- **Description:** The [Viam app](https://app.viam.com) is unable to communicate with your robot, and will attempt to reconnect every few seconds until it is able to do so.

> When a robot is disconnected, it will continue to run with its locally-cached current configuration, but is not accessible for control or configuration remotely through the Viam app.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a robot is disconnected, it will continue to run with its locally-cached current configuration, but is not accessible for remote control or configuration through the Viam app.
```
[opt]

- **Solution:** Check the following to ensure your robot is accessible to the Viam app:
   - Is the {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="board" text="board" >}} component connected to the internet?
   - Is the `ssh` service configured and running locally on the board?

>      You can check with `sudo systemctl status ssh`. It should be listed as `active (running)`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     You can check with `sudo systemctl status ssh`.
     It should be listed as `active (running)`.
```
newline

   - Is the `viam-server` service running locally on the board?

>      You can check with `sudo systemctl status viam-server`. It should be listed as `active (running)`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     You can check with `sudo systemctl status viam-server`.
     It should be listed as `active (running)`.
```

      - If it is listed as `stopped` or `failed`, you can try restarting it with `sudo systemctl start viam-server`
      - If it is not found, be sure you have followed the [installation instructions for your board](https://docs.viam.com/installation/#preparation), and then followed the instructions on the **Setup** tab on the Viam app.
      - If none of the above succeed in getting `viam-server` up and running, check the logs for any pertinent error messages.
      Depending on your Linux OS, you might use a command similar to `grep 'viam-server' /var/log/syslog | tail -50` to show the 50 most recent log messages from `viam-server`.

### Error: cannot parse config: JSON: cannot unmarshal string into Go struct

- **Full Error:** `Error: cannot parse config: JSON: cannot unmarshal string into Go struct field Component.components.frame of type float64.`

> - **Description:** A [frame](/services/frame-system/) attribute may be malformed, and is preventing the parsing of the component's configuration.

Reviewer 2: If we could nail down the technically accurate way to change this, I'd love to know what is parsing it. i.e., "...and is preventing `viam-server` from parsing the component's configuration." But it's probably something else not `viam-server` doing the parsing?

Author: This is what I have from engineering on this error:

> What is it/Why it happens: Check if there is a frame attribute in components in fancy config or in raw JSON config. It may be that the robot config generated a broken “frame” information and prepopulated the translation values with empty strings when they are currently programmed to be floats on the backend. 

I opted not to include this, and have a suspicion it no longer applies. Let me ask eng to be sure! Will report back.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need that level of detail; I was just thinking that what you have here is passive voice-adjacent and maybe it could be just ever so slightly more precise and active.

Reviewer 2: (But also not going to block merging just for this! I should've marked as [opt] :) )

- **Solution:** Check the **Config** tab for your robot in the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com) and look for a frame attribute, either in **Builder** mode, under the **Frame System** tab or in **Raw JSON** mode.
   If you see a `frame` attribute that you didn't create yourself, delete the whole `frame` object from the JSON config.
   It will resemble the following:

   ``` json
   "frame": {
      "orientation": {
         "value": {}
      },
      "parent": "",
      "translation": {
         "x": "",
         "y": "",
         "z": ""
      }
   }
   ```

### Error: failed to find the best driver that fits the constraints

- **Description:** When working with a [camera](/components/camera) component, depending on the camera, you may need to explicitly provide some camera-specific configuration parameters.

- **Solution:** Check the specifications for your camera, and manually provide configuration parameters such as width and height to the camera component configuration page on the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com).

> Under **Config > Components**, find your camera, then fill in your camera's specific configuration either using the **Show more** button to show the relevant configuration options, or the **Go to advanced** link in the component's upper-right to enter these attributes manually.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Under **Config > Components**, find your camera, then fill in your camera's specific configuration either using the **Show more** button to show the relevant configuration options, or the **Go to advanced** link in the component panel's upper-right to enter these attributes manually.
```

- **Solution:** The message will ask `Are you sure you want to continue connecting?`.
   Type `yes` and then press the return key to continue with the connection.
   You should receive a successful confirmation message similar to: `Warning: Permanently added 'hostname.local' to the list of known hosts.`
   This is only required for the first `ssh` connection you make to a newly-imaged board.

### ssh: connect to host hostname.local port 22: Host is down

- **Description:** Your computer is not able to connect to the {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="board" text="board" >}} through `ssh`.

- **Solution:** Ensure that both your computer and the board itself are connected to the internet, and verify each of the following:
  - If you are on a Windows computer, be sure that you do not have an outgoing firewall preventing `ssh` connections over port `22`.
  - Your `ssh` connection string should resemble the following: `ssh username@hostname.local`.
    Be sure that you match hostname, username, and password exactly to what you initially configured when imaging your board.

>   - If you are still unable to connect, try power cycling the board and trying your connection again.

Reviewer 3: can we say restarting instead of powercycling? I am worried the latter is less known

>   - If that fails, try re-imaging your board following the [installation guide](/installation/) appropriate for your board.

Reviewer 3: If you do that and use the same hostname there's an ssh issue where you'll have to manually remove the hostname form the hosts file - we should probably cover that too then :)

Author: Shouldn't need to edit `known_hosts` in this case, but you would be prompted to confirm if you chose a different hostname for the second imaging (or if you used IP like `andf@123.45.67.89` and the IP address has changed):

```
laptop:~ user-local$ ssh user-pi@my-pi-image-2.local
The authenticity of host 'my-pi-image-2.local ' can't be established.
ED25519 key fingerprint is SHA256:ABCABCABCABCABCABCABCABCABCABCACB.
This host key is known by the following other names/addresses:
    ~/.ssh/known_hosts:4: my-pi-image-1.local
Are you sure you want to continue connecting (yes/no/[fingerprint])? yes
Warning: Permanently added 'my-pi-image-2.local' (ED25519) to the list of known hosts.
```

For most cases, the hostname would be the same, and the key could be reused seamlessly without user interaction.

- **Solution:** The message will ask `Are you sure you want to continue connecting?`.
   Type `yes` and then press the return key to continue with the connection.
   You should receive a successful confirmation message similar to: `Warning: Permanently added 'hostname.local' to the list of known hosts.`
   This is only required for the first `ssh` connection you make to a newly-imaged board.

### ssh: connect to host hostname.local port 22: Host is down

- **Description:** Your computer is not able to connect to the {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="board" text="board" >}} through `ssh`.

- **Solution:** Ensure that both your computer and the board itself are connected to the internet, and verify each of the following:
  - If you are on a Windows computer, be sure that you do not have an outgoing firewall preventing `ssh` connections over port `22`.
  - Your `ssh` connection string should resemble the following: `ssh username@hostname.local`.
    Be sure that you match hostname, username, and password exactly to what you initially configured when imaging your board.

>   - If you are still unable to connect, try restarting the board and trying your connection again.

Author: Great question! For `ssh` connectivity, all forms of restarting should be identical. We aren't caching credentials or temp configs in NVRAM (for which we might want 30s power-down to force a flush, for example. Common with cable modems). We do get to rely upon the system's init system (like `systemd`) to handle bringing up the `ssh` service for us, which abstracts away most of the thinking we'd have to otherwise do during boot to ensure services that depend on each other (or certain hardware to be initialized, or ...) are available, started in correct order, etc.

There is a possibility that a `restart` specifically can trigger different behavior in the service coming back online than an explicit `shutdown` or power-cable-pull (`systemd` for example allows for explicit targeting of each with: `shutdown.target` `reboot.target`, `poweroff.target`, etc.). However, `ssh` starts later in the boot process (`systemd` uses `multi-user.target`, essentially SysV init run level 3 or 4 or 5 depending on distro), where any of those "how we got to here" differences have almost certainly already been addressed.

So, from the user perspective, whatever "restart the board" means to them (pull the plug, pull the plug and wait, `sudo reboot`, `sudo shutdown -h now`) should affect the `ssh` service coming back up after the system is back up in an identical way!

>   - If you are still unable to connect, try restarting the board and trying your connection again.

Reviewer 2: Ah cool! Thanks so much for that info!

### Browser Plugins

> - **Chrome Plugin: Allow right click** - This Chrome plugin interferes with the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com)'s ability  to configure a Service. If you are experiencing issues with the **Create Service** pane in the Viam app, temporarily disable this plugin until you have saved your configuration in the Viam app.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Chrome Plugin: Allow right click** - This Chrome plugin interferes with the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com)'s ability  to configure a Service.
If you are experiencing issues with the **Create Service** pane in the Viam app, temporarily disable this plugin until you have saved your configuration in the Viam app.
```
newline

### Browser Plugins

> - **Chrome Plugin: Allow right click** - This Chrome plugin interferes with the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com)'s ability to configure a Service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Chrome Plugin: Allow right click** - This Chrome plugin interferes with the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com)'s ability to configure a service.
```
I *think* it should be lower case here since it's not talking about any specific service?
